---
layout: post
title: Peasant Cube
---
# Peasant Cube

## What is peasant cube?

Peasant cube is a living singleton cube constructed entirely of commons and uncommon cards. The card rarity is based on the lowest rarity that the card was ever printed. For example, [Clone](https://magiccards.info/m14/en/47.html) was printed at both rare and uncommon, so it can be included.

## Why draft peasant cube over other cubes?

Peasant cube is designed to feel more like a complex limited match, unlike a normal singleton cube which produces extremely swingy games.

## What are the archetypes?

The archetypes are primarily based on two color combinations. Those who are familiar with the ravnica guilds will understand where these come from. There are no 3 color cards in the cube (outside of tri-lands). The most powerful payoff cards in the cube are the multicolor cards, they are intended to highlight the strategy.

### U/W (Azurius)

This archetype is based on tempo and flying creatures. This can be shown through tempo based cards like [Lyev Skyknight](https://magiccards.info/query?q=Lyev+Skyknight&v=card&s=cname) and [Skymark Roc](https://magiccards.info/query?q=Skymark+Roc&v=card&s=cname) which both slow down your opponents creatures long enough to kill them before they have an opportunity to be relevant. Some key mono-colored cards include [Mist Raven](https://magiccards.info/query?q=Mist+Raven&v=card&s=cname), [Favorable Winds](https://magiccards.info/query?q=Favorable+Winds&v=card&s=cname), and [Aerial Responder](https://magiccards.info/query?q=Aerial+Responder&v=card&s=cname).

### U/B (Dimir)

This archetype is just control 2 for 1s. I mean, just look at [Dinrova Horror](). 

### B/R (Rakdos)

Unlike the normal rakdos strategy (attack at any costs), the rakdos strategy here is primarily based on board wipes, artifacts, and control. Some key cards are [Rakdos Keyrune](), [Blightning](), and [Bituminous Blast]().

### R/G (Gruul)

This is the haste based aggro deck. Games are frequently won on the back of [Bloodbraid Elf]() and [Fires of Yavimaya](). The bloodrush mechanic also helps in providing some of the few combat tricks in the cube as well as they are pseudo haste for your creatures.

### G/W (Selesnya)

This is the tokens based strategy. A selesnya player can commonly be found casting [Trostanni's Summoner]() and populating the rhino with [Vitu-Ghazi Guildmage](). Cards that also work well in this strategy are equipment that make your creatures big (and trade well).

### W/B (Orzhov)

The orzhov play slow grindy games that will make your opponent not realize that they've lost the game about 10 turns ago. This includes winning card advantage wars off of the [Knights of the Black Rose]() and [Restoration Gearsmith]().

### B/G (Golgari)

Golgari is a midrange/combo deck that itends on putting [Ulamogg's Crusher]() or [Palooka Worm]() in the graveyard and reanimating it with [Makeshift Manequin]() or [Animate Dead]().

### G/U (Simic)

Simic is the ramp deck that intends on gathing more resources than their opponent. For example [Spring//Mind]() will ramp you into a [River Hoopoe]() that cycles or [Roaring Primadox]() that bounces a creature that has a good enter the battlefield ability.

### U/R (Izzet)

Izzet is a 'spells matter' deck that runs a few win conditions and then wins off the back of cards like [Young Pyromancer](), [Wee Dragonauts](), or [Enigma Drake]().

### R/W (Boros)

Boros is an aggressive, efficient, 'go wide' strategy. Small creatures can chip in for a few points of damage until the boros player plays a [Flame-Kin Zealot]() or [Goblin Trenches]() to finish off their opponent.

## Colors

The individual colors are intended to support the guilds strategies. Most cards will be able to be played in two or more archetypes.

## Artifacts

Just because it can go in your deck, doesn't mean that it's designed to. Equipment are typically better on a token than a 8 mana 8/8.

## Lands

The lands include the cycle of karoo (bounce) lands, a cycle of tri color lands, a cycle of spell (or creature) lands, a cycle of 'cycle' lands and miscelanous fixing/manlands/utility lands.

## Mono Color Decks

I think that realistically, only white, red, and black would be able to support this. Green and blue just do not have enough removal on their own.

## Tri-Color Decks

Some guilds pair better with others. It's definitely doable but the table can't support everyone playing 3 colors

## Combos

They exist if you have seen them before. (hint: if a card doesn't look great by itself, there's probably a combo). 

# Feedback

Please give me any feedback that you have (good or bad!). This cube is my brain child and I don't have a lot of opportunities to draft it, so each time I try to gather as much data as possible. What was fun? What was not? What did you like? What did you not like? What underperformed? What overperformed?

# Ban List

- Sol Ring
- Loxodon Warhammer
- Control Magic
- Skullclamp